h2. The Adapters

%INCLUDE _adapters.textile%

If you're interested in writing your own adapter, read on.

h2. The Anatomy of an Adapter

Ambition adapters consist of two parts: *Translators* and the *Query*.  Translators
are used to translate plane jane Ruby into strings while the Query is used to build
and execute a query from those strings.

The three translators are @Select@, @Slice@, and @Sort@.  Their names correspond to the
API method they represent. Each translator consists of methods which convert passed 
arguments into a string.

Here's how the ActiveRecord adapter maps translator classes to SQL clauses:

  * @Select@ =&gt; @WHERE@
  * @Slice@ =&gt; @LIMIT@ and @OFFSET@
  * @Sort@ =&gt; @ORDER BY@

Your translators and Query have three special methods available to them at all time:

  * @owner@
  * @clauses@
  * @stash@

@owner@ is the class from which the request was generated.

<ruby>
User.select { |u| u.name == 'Pork' }
# => owner == User
</ruby>

@clauses@ is the hash of translated string arrays, keyed by processors.

<ruby>
User.select { |u| u.name == 'Pork' }
# => clauses ==  { :select => [ "users.name = 'Pork'" ] }
</ruby>

@stash@ is your personal private stash.  A hash you can use for
keeping stuff around.  Translators are free to set things which 
can later be picked up by the Query class.

For instance, the @ActiveRecord@ adapter's @Select@ translator adds to the
@stash[:include]@ array whenever it thinks it needs to do a join.  The
Query class picks this up and adds it to the hash it feeds
@find(:all)@.  

<ruby>
User.select { |u| u.profile.name == 'Pork' }
# => stash == { :include => [ :profile ] }
</ruby>

@stash@ is basically a way for your translators to talk to each other and, 
more importantly, to the Query.

The Query is what kicks off the actual data store query, after all the translators have done
their business.  Its @clauses@ and @stash@ hashes are as full as they will ever be.  

The kicking is done by one of two methods:

  * @kick@ 
  * @count@
  
While two other methods are generally expected to turn the @clauses@ hash into something
semantically valid:

  * @to_s@
  * @to_hash@

So, for instance, @Query#kick@ may look like this:

<ruby>
def kick
  owner.find(:all, to_hash)
end
</ruby>

A straightforward translator/query API reference can be found on the "api":api.html page.

The easiest way to understand translators is to check out the source of the existing adapters
or by using the adapter generator.

h2. The Adapter Generator

Ambition ships with an @ambition_adapter@ script which can generate an adapter skeleton.  Built 
using Dr Nic's "Rubigen":http://rubigen.rubyforge.org/, it spits out all the files, tests, and 
Rakefiles your adapter needs.

Run it:

<pre>
$ ambition_adapter flickr
      create  
      create  lib/ambition/adapters/flickr
      create  test
      create  lib/ambition/adapters/flickr/base.rb
      create  lib/ambition/adapters/flickr/query.rb
      create  lib/ambition/adapters/flickr/select.rb
      create  lib/ambition/adapters/flickr/slice.rb
      create  lib/ambition/adapters/flickr/sort.rb
      create  lib/ambition/adapters/flickr.rb
      create  test/helper.rb
      create  test/select_test.rb
      create  test/slice_test.rb
      create  test/sort_test.rb
      create  README
      create  Rakefile
</pre>

Presto, you've got a ready and willing adapter skeleton in place now.  Check out the comments
and you're on your way.

h2. The Flow: Ambition + Adapters

Let us examine the flow of a typical call, using the @ActiveRecord@ adapter for reference.

The call:

<ruby>
User.select { |u| u.name == 'Chris' && u.age == 22 }.to_s
</ruby>

The first few steps:

  * @Ambition::API#select@ is called.
  * An @Ambition::Context@ is created.
  * An @Ambition::Processors::Select@ is created and added to the context.
  * The context calls @to_s@ on the new @Select@ processor
  * The block passed to @select@ is processed.
  
This processing is the real meat.  Ambition will instantiate your @Select@ translator and 
pass values to it, saving the return value of these method calls.

  * @Ambition::Adapters::ActiveRecord::Select@ is instantiated.
  * The translator's @call@ method is passed @:name@, returning @"users.name"@
  * The translator's @==@ method is passed @"users.name"@ and @"Chris"@, returning @"users.name = 'Chris'"@
  * @call@ is passed @:age@, returning @"users.age"@
  * @==@ is passed @"users.age"@ and @22@, returning @"users.age = 22"@
  * The translator's @both@ method is passed @"users.name = 'Chris'"@ and @"users.age = 22"@, 
returning @"(users.name = 'Chris' AND users.age = 22)"@

At this point we leave adapter-land.  The final string is stored in the @clauses@ hash 
(available to your @Query@) by the context.  The @clauses@ hash is keyed by the translator 
name -- in this case, @:select@.
  
  * The context is returned by @Ambition::API#select@.
  * @to_s@ is called on the context
  * The context forwards this @to_s@ call to an instance of the adapter's @Query@ class
  * The ActiveRecord adapter's @to_s@ calls @to_hash@
  * @to_hash@ uses the @clauses@ hash to build an AR hash
  * @to_s@ then uses the hash's members to build a SQL string

The final string is then returned:

<ruby>
"SELECT * FROM users WHERE (users.name = 'Chris' AND users.age = 22)"
</ruby>

And that's all there is to it.  Except, of course, for the "api":api.html page.