h2. Plain Jane Ruby

Imagine if instead of writing SQL, you could write Ruby.  Instead of writing LDAP, you
could write Ruby.  Instead of learning some esoteric API, you just stick to one you know 
and love.  

Imagine *A*mbition.  

<pre class="ruby">
>> LDAP::User.select { |m| m.name == 'jon' && m.age == 21 }.to_s
=> "(&(name=jon)(age=21))" 

>> SQL::User.select { |m| m.name == 'jon' && m.age == 21 }.to_s
=> "SELECT * FROM users WHERE users.name = 'jon' AND users.age = 21"
</pre>

It "started":http://errtheblog.com/post/10722 with SQL, but it's become so much more.  

h2. The Elevator Pitch

Ambition is a framework for writing adapters.  Adapters are RubyGems which depend on the 
@ambition@ gem and are named something along the lines of @ambitious-activerecord@.  They typically 
use Ambition to turn plain jane Ruby into some sort of domain specific query which can be executed.

Anyone can write and release an adapter.  This site describes how to write adapters using
Ambition and also hosts a few.

h2. The Community

We've got a hoppin' community over at the "Google Group":http://groups.google.com/group/ambition-rb.  Feel
free to jump in with any questions, ideas, or top 5 favorite bands discussions.

The initial blog posts were "this":http://errtheblog.com/post/10722 and "that":http://errtheblog.com/post/11998.  
Most of what they describe has become the @ambitious-activerecord@ gem.

h2. Ambitious Adapters

There are a few adapters in development or released.  

%INCLUDE _adapters.textile%

For more information on adapters, hit up the "adapters":adapters.html page.

h2. Development

Development discussion happens in the "Google Group":http://groups.google.com/group/ambition-rb.  
Stay up to date by following Chris' git repository:

@git clone git://errtheblog.com/git/ambition@
